Organ donation groups accused of safety lapses are facing multiple investigations, and new policies are underway to protect patients.

The federal government is cracking down on the U.S. organ transplant system, investigating donation groups accused of safety lapses and overhauling policies meant to protect donors and recipients.

The efforts come after congressional scrutiny and reporting in The New York Times revealed troubling problems in the system, including at organ procurement organizations, the nonprofit groups in each state that arrange transplants. A federal investigation recently found that the organization in Kentucky had ignored signs of growing alertness in critically ill patients being prepared for organ donation.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has begun investigating other nonprofits over similar accusations, as well as reining in others that flout fairness rules by sending organs to patients who are not near the top of waiting lists.

The initiatives were described in an interview with Dr. Raymond Lynch, the transplant chief at the Health Resources and Services Administration, an agency within H.H.S. that oversees the system. ''We want to make sure that people continue to have faith in the public good that is organ procurement and transplant,'' he said. ''We will make it safe and reliable.''

Dr. Lynch declined to name the targets of the investigations but said the inquiries were focused on circulatory death donation, an increasingly common practice.

Unlike most donors, who are brain-dead, these patients have brain function. But they are on life support, often in a coma, and are not expected to recover. If donation is authorized, doctors withdraw life support, wait for the patient's heart to stop and then remove the organs. This type of donation involves judgment calls that can be prone to error.

The Times reported last month on a dozen patients who endured premature or bungled attempts to retrieve their organs. Some hospitals, which are in charge of caring for potential donors until death, mistakenly determined that patients could not recover. And some procurement organizations inappropriately influenced treatment decisions, The Times reported.

In one case, signs of recovery in a New Mexico woman were dismissed until she awoke just before a planned organ removal. In another case, doctors realized that an Alabama woman was alive after they began cutting into her.

Congress released the findings last month of the H.H.S. investigation into the Kentucky procurement group, which had previously been reported by The Times. A House committee held a hearing about the reports, and two other committees have opened inquiries. The Senate Finance Committee is expected to discuss the transplant system next week with Health Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

The Association of Organ Procurement Organizations, a national trade group, has emphasized that safety errors are rare and that donations save thousands of lives every year. Still, faith in the system has been shaken as the public has learned about the safety lapses and as Mr. Kennedy has called attention to the issue.

At least 20,000 people removed their names from state donor registries last month, according to Donate Life America, a nonprofit that maintains national data. There were about 174 million donor registrations in the U.S. earlier this year.

If a patient is not a registered donor, his or her family can still authorize donation when the time comes -- nearly half of donations happen that way -- but the number of people disenrolling has alarmed officials and the more than 100,000 patients awaiting organs.

''Fewer people registering their lifesaving decision to be an organ, eye and tissue donor may mean more deaths of patients waiting,'' Donate Life America said in a statement.

As part of the effort to restore trust, H.H.S. has created a working group to write rules for circulatory death donation, with a deadline for finishing its work by late November. The Kentucky procurement organization has already made changes, including increased training and regular neurology tests on potential donors.

The transplant system itself, known as the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network, is also investigating several cases reported by The Times, according to two people involved. The system's oversight committee has decided to penalize a procurement organization in West Virginia, the people said. The organization did not respond to questions, nor did system officials.

The government is also moving to boost fairness in organ allocation.

In February, The Times reported that procurement organizations were increasingly violating regulations by bypassing patients on waiting lists and sending organs to recipients who had not been waiting as long and were not as sick. Organizations skipped patients for nearly 20 percent of transplants last year, six times as often as a few years earlier.

The organizations said they bypassed patients in order to place organs that were at risk of becoming unusable. But The Times found they often did it to save staff time or send organs to hospitals where they had relationships.

Since that report, the system has slightly reduced the frequency of skipping. In the second quarter of this year, deviations from the list occurred less than 18 percent of the time, a Times analysis found. Several of the procurement groups that have most curbed the practice appeared in The Times's reporting, including organizations in Miami and Minnesota.

Records show that one of those groups, Lifebanc, in Cleveland, ended an arrangement with the Cleveland Clinic that several employees had told The Times had led it to steer organs to the hospital. Lifebanc did not respond to messages seeking comment.

In a statement this week, the Association of Organ Procurement Organizations said it was concerned that reducing the skipping of patients could lead to organs not being used. It criticized H.H.S. for ending pilot programs to explore ways to speed up the allocation process.

Data shows that the recent reductions in bypassing patients have not led to more organs being discarded. In fact, organ usage has increased.

H.H.S. is pushing for further progress. This month, it reminded procurement organizations they must follow the lists. If they continue to regularly skip patients, they will be punished, the notice said.

Regulators have also begun working on new allocation policies and have started publishing data online about how often procurement organizations skip patients.

Mark Hansen contributed reporting.

Mark Hansen contributed reporting.

CAPTION(S):

PHOTO: Transporting a newly recovered liver in Michigan. Some types of organ donation involve judgment calls that can be prone to error. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRYAN DENTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (A17) This article appeared in print on page A1, A17.

Copyright: COPYRIGHT 2025 The New York Times Company
http://www.nytimes.com
