The Israeli government said last week that it wanted to capture Gaza City, but how and when it will proceed has yet to be decided.

Since its announcement on Friday, Israel’s plan to capture Gaza City has been roundly criticized inside and outside Israel. Palestinians and foreign leaders say the plan will prolong the war and the suffering of Palestinian civilians. The Israeli left says it will likely endanger hostages still held by Hamas. The Israeli right says it will not do enough to defeat Hamas.

Now, a new criticism is emerging within Israel: There is little clarity over what exactly this operation will involve.

While there have been vague proclamations by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s military has yet to complete the tactical battle plan. There has been no public confirmation of how long any occupation of the city will last — or when it will begin, and how it will differ from Israel’s capture of Gaza City in the opening months of the war in 2023.

Intense Israeli strikes continued overnight into Monday, killing several Al Jazeera journalists and forcing the displacement of civilians in some Gaza City neighborhoods. But the Army has not yet mobilized the tens of thousands of military reservists who will most likely be needed to staff the broader operation. And while Israel has threatened to force out the hundreds of thousands of Palestinians still living in Gaza City, it has yet to order their expulsion.

Over the weekend, Mr. Netanyahu doubled down on the threat to capture Gaza City, saying at a press briefing that Israel had “no choice” but to proceed because Hamas had yet to surrender.

Yet he gave little further detail about the plan.

“What does Netanyahu want? Does he want a hostage deal or to conquer Gaza?” asked Nahum Barnea, one of Israel’s best-known columnists, in an analysis published on Monday in Yediot Ahronot, a centrist broadsheet.

“I don’t understand what the military meaning of ‘seizing control’ is,” Mr. Barnea added. “I’m not sure that anyone in the military does either.”

Mediators are still trying to bring about a truce between Israel and Hamas. Some Israeli officials say that by announcing a major escalation in the conflict while delaying its enactment, Mr. Netanyahu may simply be trying to pressure Hamas into making greater concessions in those negotiations.

The decision to seek control of Gaza City has angered all sides — including Palestinians, Israeli critics of Mr. Netanyahu who say it should never have been made at all and Israeli right-wingers who say the plan does not go far enough.

“The only tangible idea is to protract the war. The details do not matter to Netanyahu,” said Alon Pinkas, an Israeli political commentator and former ambassador.

“The war never had clear political objectives aligned with military operations. There was never an endgame, never a political vision of postwar Gaza,” Mr. Pinkas said in an interview, adding that the latest Israeli proposal “evinces this to its highest and most dangerous form.”

Those at the other end of the political spectrum also decried the lack of detail provided, saying that it showed Mr. Netanyahu was not serious about defeating Hamas.

“The plan is only ‘more of the same,’” said Hallel Biton Rosen, writing for the website of the far-right Channel 14 news network. “We must not stop. We must continue with full force until total victory.”

Myra Noveck and Rawan Sheikh Ahmad contributed reporting.

PHOTO: Tens of thousands of Israelis marched in Tel Aviv on Saturday, calling for a deal to free hostages held in Gaza. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Amit Elkayam for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)Tens of thousands of Israelis marched in Tel Aviv on Saturday, calling for a deal to free hostages held in Gaza.Amit Elkayam for The New York Times

PHOTO: Tens of thousands of Israelis marched in Tel Aviv on Saturday, calling for a deal to free hostages held in Gaza. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Amit Elkayam for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)The scene on Monday after an Israeli strike killed several Al Jazeera journalists in Gaza City.Saher Alghorra for The New York Times

Copyright: COPYRIGHT 2025 The New York Times
https://www.nytimes.com/