For weeks, Israel has engaged in back-channel talks over a diplomatic agreement with the Syrian government. Its strikes on Damascus this week highlight a lack of strategic clarity.

For weeks, Israel and Syria have engaged in secret back-channel talks, searching for a diplomatic resolution to decades of tensions, mainly over territory captured by Israel from Syria during the Arab-Israeli war of 1967.

The Israeli news media has been awash with optimistic predictions of a limited nonaggression pact, or even a landmark peace deal between the Jewish state and the former jihadists who seized control of Damascus last December.

Israel's brazen strikes this week on Syrian government forces and infrastructure, including in the capital, Damascus, have highlighted the premature nature of such expectations in such a fluid geopolitical context. It has also exemplified how Israel, still traumatized by Hamas's surprise attack in October 2023 but buoyed by its more recent successes against Hezbollah and Iran, is now more likely to use force to pre-emptively address perceived threats -- even if it derails diplomatic efforts to achieve the same goal.

''It seems very discordant,'' said Itamar Rabinovich, an Israeli historian of Syria who led Israel's negotiations with Syria during the 1990s. ''It runs against the effort to negotiate.''

The strikes reflect Israel's post-2023 military doctrine, which combines, Mr. Rabinovich said, ''a very strange mixture of paranoia following Oct. 7 and a sense of power following the success in Lebanon and in Iran. And the result is this preference for using force rather than diplomacy.''

Israel's intervention in Syria, just as talks between the two were gaining momentum, prompted some exasperation in Washington, according to one senior U.S. official. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss internal assessments, said that Damascus had been trying de-escalate tensions but that Israel seemed intent on striking regardless. Marco Rubio, the U.S. secretary of state, described the Syria-Israel tensions as a ''misunderstanding'' and said that the United States had helped broker an agreement between all parties involved in the clashes.

The specific spur for Israel's actions this week was the Syrian government's deployment of forces to southwest Syria to contain fighting between Bedouin tribesmen and Syria's Druse minority. Though much of Syria's arsenal was decimated by scores of Israeli strikes last winter and years of civil war, the Syrian government was able to send troops in pickup trucks and outdated tanks.

For Israelis, that posed two challenges. The first was a perceived security threat in southwest Syria, where Israel wants to prevent the buildup of potentially hostile forces. Wary of the new Syrian government, which is led by hard-line Islamists, Israel has occupied pockets of southwestern Syria since December in order to prevent Syrian forces from reaching the Israeli border.

Israel's second challenge is domestic. The treatment of the Syrian Druse this week set off unrest among members of Israel's own small but influential Druse community, who held protests, blocked roads and in some cases forced their way into Syria after reports, unconfirmed by The New York Times, of extrajudicial killings there. There was particular fury after Israelis began to circulate online footage, also unverified by The Times, that appeared to show Islamist fighters humiliating Druse men.

Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, alluded to much of this context in a statement on Thursday that sought to explain Israel's actions. ''We have set forth a clear policy: demilitarization of the region to south of Damascus,'' Mr. Netanyahu said. ''That's rule number one,'' he added. ''Rule number two is protecting the brothers of our brothers, the Druse.''

For now, it is unclear how committed Israel is to a prolonged military campaign in southern Syria, or if its strikes were mainly a short-term attempt to quell the fury of Israeli Druse. Roughly 150,000 Druse live under Israeli governance, including some 20,000 in the Golan Heights, which Israel captured from Syria during the Arab-Israeli war of 1967 and later annexed. Unlike other Arab groups in Israel, the Druse usually serve in the Israeli military. Some of them have reached the rank of general and others died in combat during the Gaza war.

That has helped to forge a bond between Jewish and Druse citizens of Israel, even after a contentious law passed in 2018 angered many Druse because it undermined their status within the Jewish state.

Rafik Halabi, the mayor of Daliyat al-Karmel, one of the biggest Druse towns in Israel, said the Druse protests had put pressure on the Israeli government to act, particularly after roughly 1,000 Israeli Druse men reportedly crossed into Syrian territory. But Mr. Halabi said he remains unconvinced that the government wants to repeatedly intervene, particularly after meeting and speaking in recent days with Israeli generals and political leaders, including Mr. Netanyahu.

''Does Israel really want to interfere in the Syrian situation? I am not sure,'' Mr. Halabi said in a phone interview. ''As far as I could understand, they want to be in, and at the same time they want to be out.''

For now, the strikes have cast a long shadow over the negotiations between Israel and Syria, leaving little immediate hope for a diplomatic agreement. On Thursday, President Ahmed al-Shara of Syria accused Israel of seeking to sow ''chaos'' in the country.

But Israel most likely still hopes for some kind of limited nonaggression pact with Mr. al-Shara, according to Carmit Valensi, an Israeli expert on Israel-Syrian affairs at the Institute for National Security Studies, a research group in Tel Aviv.

Mr. Netanyahu's maximalist call for a completely demilitarized zone south of Damascus may simply be an opening gambit that precedes a compromise, Dr. Valensi added. Israel could allow Syrian forces to return to parts of southwest Syria, she said -- as long as Mr. al-Shara formally agrees not to attack Israel in a deal that roughly follows the same contours as a pact forged in 1974 between Israel and the previous Syrian regime.

''Israel understands that full demilitarization in the long term is not achievable, which is why this is part of a negotiation process,'' Dr. Valensi said. ''In other words, it's a starting point.''

Reporting was contributed by Eric Schmitt in Washington; Johnatan Reiss in Tel Aviv; and Myra Noveck in Jerusalem.

CAPTION(S):

PHOTO: An Israeli strike hit Syria's defense ministry on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALI HAJ SULEIMAN/GETTY IMAGES) This article appeared in print on page A6.

Copyright: COPYRIGHT 2025 The New York Times Company
http://www.nytimes.com